# Incident: 2025-04-07 13-04-00

## Summary

> [!NOTE]
> Questions for Summary Stage: 
> Write a summary of the incident in a few sentences. Include what happened, why, the severity of the incident and how long the impact lasted.

Between the hour of 13:04 UTC and 13:13 UTC on 2025-04-07, 11 users encountered an failure which prevented them from ordering pizzas. The event was triggered by a pizza factory outage at 13:04. The pizza factory outage failed due to a planned shutdown ordered by the CS329 faculty.

The event was detected by our team when the Pizza Purchases alert with Grafana Metrics activated. The team started working on the event by first notifying the pizza factory staff that an outage had occured. They implemented the actual fix. This severe incident affected 100% of users. The impact of the outage was mitigated by the quick response of our team and the fact the shutdown occured for less than 10 minutes.

## Detection

> [!NOTE]
> Questions for Detection Stage:
> When did the team detect the incident? How did they know it was happening? How could we improve time-to-detection? Consider: How would we have cut that time by half?

This incident was detected when the Pizza Purchase alert was triggered and Connor Nesbit of the JWT Pizza DevOps was paged. He was able to quickly see that no pizza purchases were occuring due to a high number of pizza purchase failures and then by noticing the lack of pizza revenue, latency, and successful pizza purchases.

Time-to-detection could be improved by updating our program and alerts to automatically check to see if the pizza factory is responding if there is continuous pizza failures.

## Impact

> [!NOTE]
> Questions for Impact Stage:
> Describe how the incident impacted internal and external users during the incident. Include how many support cases were raised.

For 9 minutes between 13:04 UTC and 13:13 UTC on 04/07/25, the pizza factory experienced an outage which prevented end users from ordering pizza. This incident affected 11 customers (100% OF JWT Pizza users). No submit tickets or social media posts were submitted by our users.


## Timeline

> [!NOTE]
> Questions for Timeline Stage:
> Detail the incident timeline. We recommend using UTC to standardize for timezones.
> Include any notable lead-up events, any starts of activity, the first known impact, and escalations. Note any decisions or changed made, and when the incident ended, along with any post-impact events of note.
> 
All times are UTC.

- _13:04_ - Chaos event initiated; Pizza Creation Latency Drops
- _13:05_ - Pizza Purchase Failures increase sharply
- _13:07_ - Alerts triggered in Grafana and text sent to OnCall Team
- _13:08_ - Grafana push mobile alert is sent
- _13:09_ - Connor Nesbit of the JWT Pizza DevOps Team goes operational
- _13:11_ - He searches logs and finds failure responses from pizza factory
- _13:12_ - He submits report to pizza factory service.
- _13:13_ - Pizza Factory service staff bring their operations back online.

## Response

> [!NOTE]
> Questions for Response Stage:
> Who responded to the incident? When did they respond, and what did they do? Note any delays or obstacles to responding.

After receiving a page at 13:07 UTC, Connor Nesbit came online at 13:09 UTC in Grafana Metrics and Logging for JWT Pizza Production. He investiaged the logs and found that the pizza purchase order requests were all responding with a message indicating pizza factory failure instead of the proper order. The biggest delay was in searching the logs in Grafana. There were many that were not relevant. He got in touch with the pizza factory report site and reported the incident. The pizza factory staff fixed the issue within 2 minutes.

## Root Cause

> [!NOTE]
> Questions for Root Cause Stage:
> Note the final root cause of the incident, the thing identified that needs to change in order to prevent this class of incident from happening again.

The root cause was a temporary failure of the Pizza Factory service. The JWT Pizza service relies entirely on this external system to fulfill orders. When it is down or degraded, no orders can be completed.

## Resolution

> [!NOTE]
> Questions for Resolution Stage:
> Describe how the service was restored and the incident was deemed over. Detail how the service was successfully restored and you knew how what steps you needed to take to recovery.
> Depending on the scenario, consider these questions: How could you improve time to mitigation? How could you have cut that time by half?

The issue resolved on its own as the Pizza Factory service recovered. No restart or manual intervention was required on our side. The JWT Pizza backend remained operational and started to correctly report pizza purchases, revenue, and pizza latency.

## Prevention

> [!NOTE]
> Questions for Prevention Stage:
> Now that you know the root cause, can you look back and see any other incidents that could have the same root cause? If yes, note what mitigation was attempted in those incidents and ask why this incident occurred again.

This same root cause hasn't impacted the company before. It isn't the cause for previous incidents.


## Action items

> [!NOTE]
> Questions for Action Item Stage:
> Describe the corrective action ordered to prevent this class of incident in the future. Note who is responsible and when they have to complete the work and where that work is being tracked.

1. Add a health check system to detect Pizza Factory downtime early (Owner: Connor Nesbit, Due: 2025-04-09)

2. Update on-call playbook to include factory health-check instructions (Owner: Connor Nesbit, Due: 2025-04-10)

3. Add a synthetic test order job to trigger regularly and detect Pizza Factory slowness automatically (Owner: Connor Nesbit, Due: 2025-04-10)

